---
title: Capi v0.1.0-gamma.0
authors: [harry, t6]
---

Today marks the first 'gamma' release of [Capi](https://docs.capi.dev), a
TypeScript framework for crafting interactions with Substrate chains. For over a
year, we've been developing in the open, experimenting with different designs
and tirelessly iterating. After 49 beta releases, we're now confident that
Capi's architecture and developer experience can support and grow with the
Polkadot ecosystem. **We're holding off on a formal v0.1.0 release until
stabilization of the new JSON RPC API spec and related Smoldot integration.**
That being said, we would be grateful for your feedback. Please visit
[the setup guide](https://docs.capi.dev/setup) to get started with Capi and
don't hesitate to engage us about anything Capi-related in
[the GitHub issues](https://github.com/paritytech/capi/issues).

## Release Highlights

Let's touch on a few parts of the experience that we believe will bring joy to
our community (especially you beautiful TypeScript developers).

### Fully-Typed APIs For Every Chain

One of the qualities we love most about the Polkadot ecosystem is its focus on
interoperability. Everything from XCM integration, to Polkadot's core
architecture, to the very name itself is geared towards a future in which
purpose-built chains can talk to one another. It would stand to reason that an
app developer may want to integrate with many chains — potentially within the
same program. Capi makes this easy. Simply declare the nets with which you wish
to interact.

```ts title="nets.ts"
import { net } from "capi/nets"

export const polkadot = net.ws({ url: "wss://rpc.polkadot.io/" })
export const statemint = net.ws({ url: "wss://statemint-rpc.polkadot.io/" })
export const collectives = net.ws({ url: "wss://collectives.api.onfinality.io/public-ws" })
// ...
```

Then, [`sync`](/setup#syncing) and import corresponding, chain-specific APIs.

```ts title="main.ts"
import {
  polkadot, // the root of the chain's API, from which one can access pallets, storage, etc.
  AccountInfo, // a TypeScript type based on a type from the Rust source
  // ...
} from "@capi/polkadot"
```

These APIs are typed according to the unique properties of each chain. You can
compose interactions across chains with confidence. Follow any red lines to
victory.

To learn more, see our [type conversion guide](/types).

### `capi.dev`

We host a public instance of our codegen server on `capi.dev`, for ease of use
(but local codegen is also supported). This allows developers to treat the
codegen like any other library, in both Node and Deno. It also allows the
codegen to be deduplicated between libraries, reducing bundle sizes.

For more information on our reasoning behind `capi.dev`, and the alternatives,
see ["Why capi.dev?"](/faq/why-capi-dev).

### Ephemeral Development Networks

Capi makes it easy for developers to configure and test against ephemeral
networks based on any runtime.

For example, a simple XCM-compatible relay chain and parachain:

```ts title="nets.ts"
import { net } from "capi/nets"

export const rococo = net.dev({
  bin: "polkadot",
  chain: "rococo-local",
})

export const rococoContracts = rococo.parachain({
  bin: "polkadot-parachain",
  chain: "contracts-rococo-local",
  id: 1000,
})
```

You can then import from `@capi/rococo` and `@capi/rococo-contracts`, which will
automatically spawn the network.

For more information, refer to our guide on
[development setup](/setup/development).

### Automatic Binary Installation

In the previous example, you (and anyone else trying your project) would've
needed to manually compile and install the `polkadot` and `polkadot-parachain`
binaries, which can take several hours. Instead, you can configure Capi to
automatically install pre-built binaries (which we automatically build across a
matrix of versions and architectures).

```ts title="nets.ts"
import { net, bins } from "capi/nets"

// highlight-start
const bin = bins({
  polkadot: ["polkadot", "v0.9.38"],
  polkadotParachain: ["polkadot-parachain", "v0.9.380"],
})
// highlight-end

export const rococo = net.dev({
  // highlight-next-line
  bin: bin.polkadot,
  chain: "rococo-local",
})

export const rococoContracts = rococoDev.parachain({
  // highlight-next-line
  bin: bin.polkadotParachain,
  chain: "contracts-rococo-local",
  id: 1000,
})
```

For certain chains, we also maintain patched builds with faster block times.
Simply add `-fast` to the binary name and watch your test time drop.

The infrastructure for these builds is located in the
[`capi-binary-builds` repo](https://github.com/paritytech/capi-binary-builds).

### Pre-Funded Development Users

Every Capi development server can vend pre-funded development users. Calling
`createDevUsers` in your tests produces distinct users in each of your tests,
meaning that they can be safely run in parallel without interfering with each
other.

```ts
import { westendDev } from "@capi/westend-dev"
import { createDevUsers } from "capi"
import { signature } from "capi/patterns/signature/polkadot"

// highlight-next-line
const { alexa, billy } = await createDevUsers()

await westendDev.Balances
  .transfer({
    value: 12345n,
    dest: billy.address,
  })
  // highlight-next-line
  .signed(signature({ sender: alexa }))
  .sent()
  .dbgStatus("Transfer:")
  .finalized()
  .run()
```

You could safely run hundreds of instances of this test in parallel without
worrying about conflicting nonces or running out of funds. Although we love
Alice, Bob, Charlie, and the others... Capi's got more (up to 10,000 to be
exact).

### Rune

Capi's API is built on top of Rune, a library we've developed that facilitates
building fluent APIs supporting derived queries and derived subscriptions. Rune
ensures correct results when working with multiple interrelated subscriptions,
which arise from cross-chain interactions. Other benefits include request
deduplication and type-safe error handling.

To learn more, see our [Rune documentation](/rune).

### Cross-Engine Support

Capi supports Deno, Node, and (modern) browsers. We are developing our codebase
using Deno, as we believe it provides the best basis for supporting these three
targets. We test every PR on both Deno and Node, and we'll soon expand this to
automatically test on browsers as well.

We've tested bundling Capi for the browser with Vite and Webpack (see
[our guide on the necessary configuration](/setup/build_tool_integration)), but
if you're using a different bundler and run into any issues, please
[open an issue](https://github.com/paritytech/capi/issues/new/choose).

## What's Next?

Next, we will be moving to a Smoldot-first developer experience.

We'll try to keep the API as stable as possible, but changes may need to be
made, as the API surface Smoldot exposes is very different from what we've been
working with so far.

For live information on what we're working on, see our
[v0.1.0 roadmap](https://github.com/paritytech/capi/issues/1077).

If you encounter any bugs, or there's anything you'd like to see us add to Capi,
please don't hesitate to
[open an issue](https://github.com/paritytech/capi/issues/new/choose).

## Acknowledgements

Thank you so much to the incredible folks that made Capi possible. A special
shout out to our two other Capi team members,
[Matias Volpe](https://github.com/kratico) and
[Ryan Lee](https://twitter.com/ryanleecode); thank you for joining us in this
mission. Thank you to Parity leadership, especially
[Andreea Efteene](https://github.com/statictype) and
[Stefan Sopic](https://twitter.com/sopke86). Thank you to
[Tom Ferguson](https://github.com/vjjft) for his help on fleshing out Rune's
timing system. And, thank you to those whose projects and ideas have served as
inspiration for Capi. Some names for good measure:
[Sam Goodwin](https://github.com/sam-goodwin),
[Elad Ben-Israel](https://twitter.com/emeshbi),
[Johannes Schickling](https://github.com/schickling),
[Michael Arnaldi](https://twitter.com/MichaelArnaldi),
[Cole Lawrence](https://github.com/colelawrence) and friends.

Finally, thank you for taking an interest in Capi!
